The use of anti-inflammatory drugs in the treatment of people with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): The Perspectives of clinical immunologists from China
Wen Zhanga,1, Yan Zhaoa,1, Fengchun Zhanga,1, Qian Wanga, Taisheng Lib,c,g, Zhengyin Liuc,g,
Jinglan Wangd,g, Yan Qine,g, Xuan Zhanga,b, Xiaowei Yanf,g,⁎, Xiaofeng Zenga,⁎,
Shuyang Zhangf,g,⁎

Keywords:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Cytokine storm
Anti-inflammation treatment

The pandemic outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is rapidly spreading all over the world. Reports
from China showed that about 20% of patients developed severe disease, resulting in a fatality of 4%. In the past
two months, we clinical immunologists participated in multi-rounds of MDT (multidiscipline team) discussion on
the anti-inflammation management of critical COVID-19 patients, with our colleagues dispatched from Chinese
leading PUMC Hospital to Wuhan to admit and treat the most severe patients. Here, from the perspective of
clinical immunologists, we will discuss the clinical and immunological characteristics of severe patients, and
summarize the current evidence and share our experience in anti-inflammation treatment, including glucocorticoids, IL-6 antagonist, JAK inhibitors and choloroquine/hydrocholoroquine, of patients with severe COVID19 that may have an impaired immune system.

Since the sudden outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
in Wu Han City, China caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), in just two more months, the epidemic has
rapidly spread all over the world. On March 11, 2020, the World Health
Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. Till
March 22, globally, approximately 303,000 confirmed cases, including
more than 12,900 deaths in approximately 150 countries. Data from
China have indicated that about 20% of patients developed severe
disease, older adults, particularly those with serious underlying health
conditions, are at higher risk of death than younger ones. A minority of
patients presented with respiratory failure, septic shock and multiorgan dysfunction resulting in a fatality of 4%.
In the past two month, we took part in a serial of remote teleconsultation, discussing several critical COVID-19 patients in intensive

care unit (ICU) and clinical pathological conference (CPC). Here, from
the perspective of clinical immunologist and rheumatologists, we would
like to discuss and share our experience in the treatment of severe
COVID-19.
1. Several important features in critical COVID-19 patients
From the point of view of rheumatologists, except for respiratory
failure, the critical COVID-19 patients have common features: 1)
sudden deterioration of disease around one to two weeks after onset; 2)
much lower level of lymphocytes, especially natural killer (NK) cells in
peripheral blood; 3) extremely high inflammatory parameters, including C reactive protein (CRP) and pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6,
TNFα, IL-8, et al); 4) destroyed immune system revealed by atrophy of

Lymphocytopenia is one of the most prominent markers of COVID19, it's also one of the diagnostic criteria for COVID-19 in China [12].
Both T cells and NK cells in patients with COVID-19 were reduced. The
degree of reduction was even lower in severe cases the latter had higher
leukocytes counts and neutrophil-lymphocyte-ratio (NLR) as well. In
some critical ill patients, NK cells were extremely low, or even undetectable. In addition, memory helper T cells and regulatory T cells
were obviously decreased in severe cases [13].
More strikingly, the autopsy findings revealed that the secondary
lymphoid tissues had been destroyed in COVID-19 patients, which is
very unusual from other CS related diseases. Spleen atrophy was observed in all reported cases with decreased numbers of lymphocyte, and
significant cell degeneration, focal hemorrhagic necrosis, macrophage
proliferation and macrophage phagocytosis were found in spleen.
Similarly, lymph node atrophy and the number of lymph nodes decreased, accompanied by necrosis. Immunohistochemical staining
showed that CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells were decreased in spleen
and lymph nodes [13]. In addition, in the lung with characteristic diffused alveolar damage (DAD), the major infiltrated cells were monocytes and macrophages, moderate multinucleated giant cells, but very
few lymphocytes. Most of the infiltrating lymphocytes were CD4-positive T cells. Importantly, virus inclusion bodies can still be detected in
type II alveolar epithelia and macrophages, despite that the PCR test
was negative in blood or throat swabs [10,12,14]. This finding is consistent with the characteristics of the so called “primary cytokine” storm
induced by viral infection which were mainly produced by alveolar
macrophages, epithelial cells and endothelial cells, rather than those
observed in “secondary cytokine” storm induced by different subsets of
activated T lymphocytes in late stage of viral infection or a complication of T cell-engaging therapies [15,16].
There are two possible reasons for the destruction of the immune
system in patients with COVID-19, lymphocytes directly invaded by
virus or indirectly damaged by CS. As we know that 2019-nCoV infects
target cells through angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), while
there was no ACE2 expression on lymphocytes, we speculate that
lymphocytes were probably destroyed by CS.

Cytokine storm (CS) refers to excessive and uncontrolled release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Cytokine storm syndrome can be caused
by a variety of diseases, including infectious diseases, rheumatic diseases and tumor immunotherapy. Clinically, it commonly presents as
systemic inflammation, multiple organ failure, and high inflammatory
parameters.
In infectious diseases, CS usually originates from the focal infected
area, spreading all over the body through circulation. In coronavirus
pneumonia, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), accompanied by rapid virus
replication, a large number of inflammatory cell infiltration and CS led
to acute lung injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and
death [1,2]. Accumulating evidence revealed that a part of severe
COVID-19 patients have a elevated cytokine profile resembling CS in
SARS and MERS. Huang et al. reported the level of inflammatory factors
in patients with COVID-19. They measured cytokine levels in 41 inpatients (including 13 ICU patients and 28 non ICU patients), IL-1B, IL1RA, IL-7, IL-8, IL-9, IL-10, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IFNγ, granulocytecolony stimulating factor (G-CSF), interferon-γ-inducible protein
(IP10), monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP1A), platelet derived growth factor
(PDGF), tumor necrosis factor (TNFα), vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) were increased, among which IL-2, IL-7, IL-10, G-CSF,
IP10, MCP1, MIP1A, TNFα were higher in severe patients [3,4]. Notably, there was not pronounce difference of serum IL-6 level been the
ICU and non ICU patients. However, in another retrospective, multicentre cohort study, the same study group reported a significantly
elevation of IL-6 level in non-survival group of patients with COVID-19,
as compared with that of the survivals [5]. Several other reports also
confirmed the elevation of IL-6 in critically ill patients with COVID-19
[6–8].
In severe COVID-19, although patients have lymphcytopenia, the
lymphocytes were activated. One study analyzed the lymphocyte subsets and cytokines in 123 patients, all patients had lymphcytopenia, The
percentage of CD8 + T cell reduction were 28.43% and 61.9% in mild
and severe group respectively, and the NK cell reduction were 34.31%
and 47.62% respectively，in mild and severe groups. Also, serum IL-6
levels in severe group were significantly higher than that in mild group
[9]. In addition, the expression of HLA-DR in CD4 + and CD8 + cells
was increased, CD4 + CCR4 + CCR6 + Th17 cells also increased, and
the cytotoxic particles such as perforin and granolysin were highly
expressed in CD8 + T cells [10].
Consistent with others, most of severe COVID-19 patients in our ICU
ward had persistent very high level of erythematosus sedimentation
rate (ESR), CRP, and high level of IL-6,TNFα, IL-1β, IL-8, IL2R, etc., and
were associated with ARDS, hypercoagulation and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), manifested as thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, gangrene of extremities. It is possible that CS exacerbates lung
damage as well as leads to other fetal complications. Siddiqu and Mehra
[11] proposed a 3-stage classification model, recognizing that COVID19 illness exhibited three grades of increasing severity which corresponded with distinct clinical findings, response to therapy and clinical
outcome. A small proportion of COVID-19 patients would transit into
the third and most severe stage of illness, which manifested as an extrapulmonary systemic hyperinflammation syndrome. In this stage,

severe COVID-19 patients
Another prominent clinical manifestation in severe COVID-19 patients is endothelium damage. Mimicry of vasculitis could be seen in
severe COVID-19 patients. Clinically, many critical ill patients have
vasculitis-like manifestations, or even gangrene at their extremities;
Pathology examination revealed the blood vessels of alveolar septum
were congested and edematous, with modest infiltration of monocytes
and lymphocytes within and around blood vessels. Small vessels
showed hyperplasia, vessel wall thickening, lumen stenosis, occlusion
and focal hemorrhage. Hyaline thrombi of micro-vessels were found in
a proportion of severe cases [10,13,14]. Intriguingly, some patients
were tested positive with high titer antiphospholipid antibodies, including anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-β2 glycoprotein antibodies,
and were associated with severe thrombosis (unpublished data). The
underlying mechanism of vascular damage may be due to the direct
injury of endothelial cells by virus, leading to DIC, anti-phospholipid
syndrome (APS) and mimicry of vasculitis. The pathological autoimmune responses involved in the anti-virus immunity are worth to be
emphasized.
2
