The epidemic of 2019-novel-coronavirus (2019-nCoV) pneumonia and insights for emerging infectious diseases in the future
Jin-Yan Li a, 1, Zhi You a, 1, Qiong Wang a, Zhi-Jian Zhou a, Ye Qiu a, Rui Luo b, c, Xing-Yi Ge a, *
a

Article history:

At the end of December 2019, a novel coronavirus, 2019-nCoV, caused an outbreak of pneumonia
spreading from Wuhan, Hubei province, to the whole country of China, which has posed great threats to
public health and attracted enormous attention around the world. To date, there are no clinically
approved vaccines or antiviral drugs available for these human coronavirus infections. Intensive research
on the novel emerging human infectious coronaviruses is urgently needed to elucidate their route of
transmission and pathogenic mechanisms, and to identify potential drug targets, which would promote
the development of effective preventive and therapeutic countermeasures. Herein, we describe the
epidemic and etiological characteristics of 2019-nCoV, discuss its essential biological features, including
tropism and receptor usage, summarize approaches for disease prevention and treatment, and speculate
on the transmission route of 2019-nCoV.
© 2020 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
2019-nCoV
Pneumonia
ACE2
Spike
SARS-CoV
Bat

In December 2019, a novel coronavirus was detected in pneumonia patients which was later named 2019-nCoV. Since the ﬁrst
human coronavirus detected in the 1960s, 2019-nCoV is the seventh coronavirus that is known to infect humans [1]. Among all the
human coronaviruses, four of them, including NL-63, 229E, HKU1
and OC43, cause mild illness, while the other three, SARS-CoV,
MERS-CoV and 2019-nCoV, lead to serious disease [2]. To characterize the new pathogen causing acute infection in humans, researchers have conducted urgent studies on the 2019-nCoV, from
its epidemiology and clinical medicine to etiology and virology. This
review focuses on the epidemiology and clinical manifestations of
2019-nCoV, the diagnosis and treatment of infected patients, and in
particular, evidence regarding the origin of 2019-nCoV.

* Corresponding author.

On 31th December 2019, the ﬁrst pneumonia case of unknown
etiology was reported in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. In
order to identify the etiology, a number of possible etiological
agents were ruled out, including the Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), the Middle-East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), avian inﬂuenza virus, and other
common respiratory pathogens. Finally, a new coronavirus,
temporally named 2019-nCoV, was identiﬁed to be the pathogen
responsible for disease, and it was announced by World Health
Organization (WHO) on 12th January [3]. As of January 11, 2020, 41
pneumonia cases were diagnosed, including seven severe cases and
one death [2]. At that time, there was no evidence of person-toperson transmission according to the scientiﬁc literature. The ﬁrst
“super-spreading” event became a hallmark of the epidemiology of
the disease. On January 20, 2020, in epidemiological investigations,
two local infections in patients who were infected by 2019-nCoV
without physical visits to Wuhan were reported in Guangdong
Province, which conﬁrmed the occurrence of human-to-human
