International Journal of Biological Sciences

Traditional Chinese Medicine in the Treatment of Patients Infected with 2019-New Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2): A Review and Perspective
Yang Yang*, Md Sahidul Islam*, Jin Wang, Yuan Li and Xin Chen
State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR 999078, China
*These authors have contributed equally to this work.
 Corresponding author: Prof. Xin Chen, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Avenida da Universidade, Taipa, Macau SAR 999078,
China. Tel.: (853) 8822 4513; Fax: (853) 2884 1358. E-mail address: xchen@um.edu.mo; ORCID: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2628-4027

Currently, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2, formerly known as
2019-nCoV, the causative pathogen of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)) has rapidly spread across
China and around the world, causing an outbreak of acute infectious pneumonia. No specific anti-virus
drugs or vaccines are available for the treatment of this sudden and lethal disease. The supportive care
and non-specific treatment to ameliorate the symptoms of the patient are the only options currently. At
the top of these conventional therapies, greater than 85% of SARS-CoV-2 infected patients in China are
receiving Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) treatment. In this article, relevant published literatures are
thoroughly reviewed and current applications of TCM in the treatment of COVID-19 patients are
analyzed. Due to the homology in epidemiology, genomics, and pathogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV, and the widely use of TCM in the treatment of SARS-CoV, the clinical evidence showing the
beneficial effect of TCM in the treatment of patients with SARS coronaviral infections are discussed.
Current experiment studies that provide an insight into the mechanism underlying the therapeutic effect
of TCM, and those studies identified novel naturally occurring compounds with anti-coronaviral activity
are also introduced.

Key words: SARS-CoV-2, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), coronavirus pneumonia

In December 2019, there was an outbreak of
unexplainable pneumonia in Wuhan city, Hubei
province, China [1]. By Jan 7, 2020, it was confirmed
that a new type of coronavirus named SARS-CoV-2
(formerly named as 2019-nCoV) had emerged [2]. The
World Health Organization (WHO) named the
Wuhan pneumonia as Coronavirus Disease-2019
(COVID-19) on Feb 11, 2020 [3]. The COVID-19
patients showed typical respiratory symptom (such as
cough, fever, and lung damage) and some other
symptoms such as fatigue, myalgia, and diarrhea [4,
5]. As of February 17, 2020, a total of 73,332 cases of
the SARS-CoV-2 infected pneumonia has been
reported in China and 25 other countries, of which
72,528 cases was found in China [6]. Due to the rapid

spread of SARS-CoV-2 through human-to-human
transmission, the cases currently continue to rise.
SARS-CoV-2 extracted from patients with pneumonia
in Wuhan is an enveloped single stranded RNA-type
beta-coronavirus [7]. The genome sequences of
SARS-CoV-2 shared 79.5% sequence identity to severe
acute respiratory syndrome-related coronaviruses
(SARS-CoV) [8, 9]. In addition, the spike (S) protein of
SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV enters human alveolar
epithelial cells through binding angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor [8].
COVID-19 can be diagnosed by either chest CT
radiography or a laboratory testing. Unfortunately,
specific antiviral drugs or vaccines currently have not
been available for the treatment [10, 11]. According to
http://www.ijbs.com

Int. J. Biol. Sci. 2020, Vol. 16
the current clinical guideline in China and the
experiences in the treatment of SARS or Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) patients, both
conventional medicine and traditional Chinese
medicine (TCM) are used for the treatment of patients
with infection of SARS-CoV-2 in China [12-14]. This
review mainly focuses on the discussion of TCM
usage in the treatment of COVID-19 patients, in the
context of current conventional management. Due to
the homology in epidemiology, genomics, and
pathogenesis of the SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV [8,
9], and widely usage of TCM in the treatment of
patients infected with SARS-CoV in 2002-2003 [15],
the clinical evidence showing the efficacy and safety
of TCM in the treatment of patients with the emerging
coronaviral will be summarized and analyzed,
including the laboratory studies that provide an
insight into molecular basis of therapeutic benefits.

Conventional treatment of SARS-CoV-2:
is there a room for Chinese medicine?
Due to the absence of a specific antiviral
therapeutics and vaccine, main treatment strategy for
COVID-19 is supportive care, which is supplemented
by the combination of broad-spectrum antibiotics,
antivirals, corticosteroids and convalescent plasma
[16] (Table 1). HIV protease inhibitors ritonavir and
lopinavir have been used, typically in combination
with appropriate antibiotics or with IFNα-2b, in the
treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infected patients [7, 17].
Nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin [12] may be
potentially beneficial for the treatment of COVID-19,
since ribavirin was approved for treating respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) infection [18] and used
extensively during the SARS and MERS outbreak [10].
However, ribavirin had severe side effects such as
anemia [18] and whether it had sufficient antiviral
activity against SARS-CoV-2 is unclear. Nucleoside
analogs favipiravir (T-705) can effectively inhibit the
activity of RNA polymerase of RNA viruses such as
influenza [19]. A recent in vitro study found that it had
the anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity [20], but the in vivo effect
remains elusive. Remdesivir may be the most
promising antiviral drug for treating COVID-19. It has
in vitro and in vivo antiviral activity against a wide
array of RNA viruses including SARS and MERS [21],
and could decrease viral loads and pathology of lungs
in animal models [22]. A study showed remdesivir
markedly inhibited the infection of SARS-CoV-2 in
Vero E6 cells [20], and most symptoms of the first US
patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 had resolved
swiftly after intravenous administration with
remdesivir [23]. Currently, it is under clinical trial to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of intravenous
remdesivir for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection
