Construction and application of carbohydrate microarrays to detect foodborne bacteria
Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214000, China;
Microbiology Laboratory, Wuxi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi 214122, China;

The rapid detection of pathogenic bacteria is vital for the prevention of outbreaks of infectious diseases, including infections by the common foodborne bacteria E.coli and Salmonella Carbohydrate microarrays have been developed as a powerful method to investigate carbohydrate-protein interaction with only very small amounts of glycans, which show great potential for detect the
carbohydrate mediated interaction with pathogens. Here, different mannose-coated microarrays were constructed and tested with E.coli
(K−12 and BL−21) and Salmonella enterica strains (ATCC9184 and ATCC31685) exhibiting different mannose binding affinities. The
optimized carbohydrate microarray was then applied to test the binding of 12 Salmonella enterica and 9 E.coli isolates from local patients for the first time and showed strong binding with certain serovars or subtypes. The results showed that microarray probed with
the single mannose structure is not enough for the detection of bacteria with various serovars or subtypes, which contain a high degree
of allelic variation in adhesin. We suggest that a complex carbohydrate microarray containing different glycan conformation may be
needed for detection of different bacteria isolates.
KEY WORDS Carbohydrate microarray; Mannose; FimH; Adhesin

Gram-negative bacteria can cause various types of infections to humans. The main concern is the increasing multidrug resistant strains of many species, including Escherichia
coli (E.coli) and Salmonella [1-4] which are common causes of
foodborne disease. Recently, diseases caused by foodborne
pathogens have drawn more attention with high morbidity
and mortality rates, high costs and threats to public health [5].
Although there are many approaches to reduce the pathogen[Received on] 02-Nov.-2019
[Research funding] This work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 31700706, 21877052), Natural
Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (No. BK20180030), and the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. JUSRP51712B), and the Public Health Research Center at Jiangnan University (No. JUPH201502), and Max Planck Society International
Partner Group Program, High-end Foreign Experts Recruitment Program, the Thousand Talents Plan (Young Professionals), and the
China Scholarship Council.

ic microorganisms in food, detection of pathogenic bacteria
remains the key to prevent the outbreaks [6-7]. The conventional culture-dependent screen-out methods are often time-consuming and laborious [8] . In past decades, many technologies
have been developed to achieve rapid and simple detection,
including polymerase chain reaction (PCR), enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunological detection [9-12].
Carbohydrates are abundant in living organisms and their
specific interactions with proteins play a vital role in a variety of biological recognition processes to enable cell adhesion and communication, fertilization, differentiation, development and metastasis of tumor cell [13-15] . Pathogenic bacteria and viruses are found to attach to the glycans on the
surface of host cells that are often the targets of bacterial toxins [16] through the carbohydrate-protein interactions and then
present pathogenic properties [13-15].
Many conventional approaches such as isothermal titration calorimetry [17-18] , surface plasmon resonance biosensing [19-20] and affinity capillary electrophoresis [21] have been
limited for the use in studies of the carbohydrate-protein interactions by the low amount of available carbohydrates.

