Transcriptomic characteristics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells in COVID-19 patients
Yong Xiong, Yuan Liu, Liu Cao, Dehe Wang, Ming Guo, Ao Jiang, Dong Guo,
Wenjia Hu, Jiayi Yang, Zhidong Tang, Honglong Wu, Yongquan Lin, Meiyuan
Zhang, Qi Zhang, Mang Shi, Yingle Liu, Yu Zhou, Ke Lan & Yu Chen
To cite this article: Yong Xiong, Yuan Liu, Liu Cao, Dehe Wang, Ming Guo, Ao Jiang, Dong
Guo, Wenjia Hu, Jiayi Yang, Zhidong Tang, Honglong Wu, Yongquan Lin, Meiyuan Zhang, Qi
Zhang, Mang Shi, Yingle Liu, Yu Zhou, Ke Lan & Yu Chen (2020) Transcriptomic characteristics
of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells in COVID-19 patients,
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2020.1747363

Circulating in China and 158 other countries and areas, the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak has caused devastating mortality
and posed a great threat to public health. However, eﬀorts to identify eﬀectively supportive therapeutic drugs and
treatments has been hampered by our limited understanding of host immune response for this fatal disease. To
characterize the transcriptional signatures of host inﬂammatory response to SARS-CoV-2 (HCoV-19) infection, we
carried out transcriptome sequencing of the RNAs isolated from the bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid (BALF) and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) specimens of COVID-19 patients. Our results reveal distinct host
inﬂammatory cytokine proﬁles to SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients, and highlight the association between COVID-19
pathogenesis and excessive cytokine release such as CCL2/MCP-1, CXCL10/IP-10, CCL3/MIP-1A, and CCL4/MIP1B.
Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 induced activation of apoptosis and P53 signalling pathway in lymphocytes may be the
cause of patients’ lymphopenia. The transcriptome dataset of COVID-19 patients would be a valuable resource for
clinical guidance on anti-inﬂammatory medication and understanding the molecular mechansims of host response.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 9 March 2020; Revised 18 March 2020; Accepted 19 March 2020
KEYWORDS COVID-19; transcriptome proﬁling; inﬂammation; cytokine; lymphopenia

The recent ongoing outbreak of viral pneumonia
(COVID-19) has sparked worldwide concern. First
reported in December 2019 in Wuhan, COVID-19
spread rapidly across other areas and caused a major
epidemic with 80,894 conﬁrmed cases including 3237
deaths in China by 17 March 17 2020. A novel highly
infectious coronavirus, oﬃcially called the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2), was subsequently identiﬁed as the causative
pathogen of this outbreak by deep sequencing and etiological investigations [1–3]. As global new cases spike
in 75 more countries apart from China, WHO has
declared that COVID-19 is currently a global public
health emergency. According to previous studies of
clinical characteristics, the most common symptoms
of SARS-CoV-2 infection are fever, cough, fatigue,
shortness of breath, and abnormalities on chest CT
[4–6]. However, some COVID-19 patients rapidly

develop severe pneumonia symptoms and complications including acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), pulmonary oedema, acute kidney injury, or
multiple organ failure [4–6]. The case fatality rate of
COVID-19 is around 3.7% according to the national
oﬃcial statistics in China.
Despite increasing global threats of COVID-19, the
host immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection
remains poorly understood. Viral RNAs are recognized
by the innate immune system through three major
classes of cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptors:
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), RIG-I-like receptors
(RLRs) and NOD-like receptors (NLRs), which trigger
the expression of interferon (IFN) and activation of
anti-viral eﬀectors such as Natural Killer cells, T CD8
+ cells and macrophages [7–10]. Coronaviruses, such
as SARS-CoV and Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV), have evolved strategies to
dampen or delay IFN production, which usually trigger
exuberant inﬂammatory host responses leading to
