
statistical analysis plan for a recursive twostage group sequential randomized

The MIRACLE trial (MERS-CoV Infection tReated with A Combination of Lopinavir/ritonavir and intErferon-β1b)
investigates the efficacy of a combination therapy of lopinavir/ritonavir and recombinant interferon-β1b provided
with standard supportive care, compared to placebo provided with standard supportive care, in hospitalized
patients with laboratory-confirmed MERS. The MIRACLE trial is designed as a recursive, two-stage, group sequential,
multicenter, placebo-controlled, double-blind randomized controlled trial. The aim of this article is to describe the
statistical analysis plan for the MIRACLE trial. The primary outcome is 90-day mortality. The primary analysis will
follow the intention-to-treat principle. The MIRACLE trial is the first randomized controlled trial for MERS treatment.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02845843. Registered on 27 July 2016.
Keywords: Coronavirus, MERS, Antiviral, Clinical trial, Lopinavir/ritonavir, Interferon-β1b, Statistical analysis plan,
Protocol

syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). MERS cases continue to occur and are often associated with respiratory
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a viral respiratory disease caused by the Middle East respiratory
and multiorgan failure [1]. There is no antiviral treatment with proven efficacy at present [1, 2].
The MIRACLE trial (MERS-CoV Infection tReated
with A Combination of Lopinavir/ritonavir and intErferon-β1b) is the first randomized controlled trial for
MERS treatment. The study protocol has been previously published [3].
There are several challenges in a trial for treatment of a
disease like MERS: (1) there is not enough information on
the effect size of the lopinavir/ritonavir and interferon-β1b
provided with standard supportive care compared to placebo provided with standard supportive care to conduct
adequate planning for the study sample size; (2) MERS is
a sporadic, unpredictable, and rare disease, which makes it
difficult to plan a separate pilot study to collect the necessary information needed for the planning of the main trial.
To overcome these challenges, we designed the MIRACLE
trial as a recursive two-stage adaptive trial, which is a relatively new method for group sequential trials [4–7]. The
approach is based on the conditional error principle,
which allows for flexible and continuous adjustment of
the trial parameters using data observed during prior
stages without inflation of the type I error [8]. Another advantage of this method is the flexibility in setting the timing and the number of needed interim analyses. Such
flexibility is necessary in a situation where recruitment
rate is unpredictable and a sudden flux in recruitment of
patients could happen at any time. Finally, the design
takes advantage of the accumulated information throughout the trial from every single recruited patient as opposed
to a traditional two-study approach (pilot followed by the
main trial).
In this article, we describe the MIRACLE trial statistical analysis plan (SAP) in advance of trial completion.
We identify the procedures to be followed for the primary and secondary analyses for the trial. The SAP was
written by the study steering committee members led by
the principal investigator, who remains blinded to both
group allocation and to study results until after completing patient recruitment, patient follow-up, and completion and locking of the database. The final study report
will follow the guidelines of the Consolidated Standards
of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) for reporting randomized controlled trials [9, 10].
The trial is being conducted according to the standard
requirements of Good Clinical Practice E6 [11]. The
SAP was developed in accordance with the International
Council for Harmonisation guidelines (E9 Statistical
principles for clinical trials and E3 clinical study reports
