Trypsin Treatment Unlocks Barrier for Zoonotic Bat Coronavirus Infection

IMPORTANCE Overall, our studies demonstrate that proteolytic cleavage is the primary 
barrier to infection for a subset of zoonotic coronaviruses. Moving forward, the
results argue that both receptor binding and proteolytic cleavage of the spike are
critical factors that must be considered for evaluating the emergence potential and
risk posed by zoonotic coronaviruses. In addition, the ﬁndings also offer a novel
means to recover previously uncultivable zoonotic coronavirus strains and argue
that other tissues, including the digestive tract, could be a site for future coronavirus
emergence events in humans.
KEYWORDS MERS-CoV, PDF2180, coronavirus, emergence, spike, zoonotic

ince the beginning of the 21st century, public health infrastructures have been
required to periodically respond to new and reemerging zoonotic viral diseases,
including inﬂuenza, Ebola, and Zika virus outbreaks (1). Severe acute respiratory
March 2020 Volume 94 Issue 5 e01774-19

syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), the ﬁrst major outbreak of the century, highlighted
the global impact of a newly emerging virus in the context of expanding development,
increased globalization, and poor public health infrastructures (2–4). A decade later, the
emergence and continued outbreaks of the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) further illustrate the ongoing threat posed by circulating zoonotic
viruses (5). Together, the outbreaks of the early part of this century argue that
continued preparations and vigilance are needed to maintain global public health.
Despite their spontaneous emergence, several research approaches to rapidly respond and even predict outbreak strains already exist. During the MERS-CoV outbreak,
our group and others were able to leverage reagents generated against related group
2C coronaviruses, namely, HKU4- and HKU5-CoV (6, 7). These reagents, created independent of viable virus replication, provided valuable insights and models for testing
serologic responses during the early stages of the MERS-CoV outbreak. Similarly,
reverse genetics systems permitted the exploration of zoonotic coronaviruses (8); using
the known SARS spike/ACE2 receptor interaction, chimeric viruses containing the
backbones of bat CoVs were generated to evaluate the efﬁcacy of both vaccines and
therapeutics (9–12). The inverse approach placed the zoonotic spike proteins in the
context of the epidemic SARS-CoV backbone (13, 14). These studies provided insight
into potential threats circulating in bats as well as the efﬁcacy of current therapeutic
treatments (15). While far from comprehensive, the results indicated that these approaches, reagents, and predictions may prove useful in preparations for future CoV
outbreaks.
In this study, we extend the examination of zoonotic viruses to a novel MERS-like
CoV strain isolated from a Ugandan bat, namely, PDF-2180 CoV (MERS-Uganda). Our
initial attempt to cultivate a chimeric MERS-CoV containing the Ugandan MERS-like
spike produced viral subgenomic transcripts but failed to result in infectious virus after
electroporation (16). However, in the current study, we demonstrate that exogenous
trypsin treatment produced high-titer virus capable of plaque formation and continued
replication. These results are consistent with the recovery of enteric CoVs like porcine
epidemic diarrhea virus (17) but have not previously been described as a major barrier
for bat-derived CoVs. The chimeric Ugandan MERS-like spike virus could replicate
efﬁciently in both Vero and Huh7 cells in the context of trypsin-containing media but
failed to produce infection of either continuous or primary human respiratory cell
cultures. Importantly, the MERS-Uganda chimeric virus successfully infected cells of the
human digestive tract, potentially identifying another route for cross-species transmission and emergence. Notably, blockade of human DPP4, the receptor for MERS-CoV,
had no signiﬁcant impact on replication of the chimeric MERS-Uganda virus, suggesting
the use of an alternative receptor. Similarly, the addition of trypsin also rescued
replication of full-length HKU5-CoV, a related group 2C bat CoV, and showed no
replication defect during DPP4 blockade. Together, the results indicate that proteolytic
activation of the spike protein is a potent constraint to infection for zoonotic CoVs and
expand the correlates for CoV emergence beyond receptor binding alone.
(This article was submitted to an online preprint archive [18].)