Viral etiologies of acute respiratory tract infections among hospitalized children e A comparison between single and multiple viral infections
Chun-Yu Yen a,b, Wan-Tai Wu a, Chia-Yuan Chang a,b,
Ying-Chi Wong a,b, Chou-Cheng Lai a,b, Yu-Jiun Chan c,
Keh-Gong Wu a,b, Miao-Chiu Hung a,b,*

KEYWORDS
Respiratory tract
infection;
Respiratory viral
panel;
Children;
Single viral infection;
Multiple viral
infections

Acute respiratory tract infections are commonly caused by viruses in
children. The differences in clinical data and outcome between single and multiple viral infections in hospitalized children were analyzed.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of hospitalized children who had
fever and a xTAG Respiratory Virus Panel (RVP) test over a 2-year period. The clinical data
were analyzed and compared between single and multiple viral infections. Viral etiologies in
upper and lower respiratory infections were analyzed and compared.
Results: A total of 442 patients were enrolled. Patients with positive viral detection (N Z 311)
had a significantly lower rate of leukocytosis (p Z 0.03), less evidence of bacterial infection
(p Z 0.004), and shorter duration of hospitalization (p Z 0.019) than those with negative viral
detection. The age of patients with multiple viral infections was younger than those with single
viral infection; however, there were no significant differences in duration of fever, antibiotics
treatment and hospitalization between these two groups.
The most commonly identified virus was human rhinovirus. About 27% (n Z 83) of patients
had multiple viral infections. Overall, the highest percentage of human bocavirus infection
was detected in multiple viral infections (79%). Lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) was

Acute respiratory tract infection (ARTI) is a leading cause of
fever and hospitalization in children worldwide.1 Upper
respiratory tract infection (URTI) is the most frequent
human illness and the most common disease in childhood;
on average, infants and preschoolers develop six to eight
URTIs per year.2 URTIs can cause non-severe but widespread epidemics that are responsible for the continuous
circulation of pathogens in the community. Moreover, lower
respiratory tract infection (LRTI) may also develop severe
disease and is the leading infectious cause of death in
children younger than five years of age.3 For both URTI and
LRTI, viral infection is the primary cause, especially in
children. Clinically, the febrile presentation could lead to
the use of more diagnostic tools and antibiotics. Therefore,
accurate and timely identification of the responsible viral
pathogen could reduce unnecessary use of antibiotics and
length of hospital stay.4
Multiple viral infections are more commonly seen in
pediatric patients than in adults.5 Multiple viral infections
were reported to be associated with increased hospital
admissions, intensive care unit admissions, lengthened
duration of hospitalization, and prolonged mechanical
ventilation use.6e8 However, some studies indicated that
disease severity, management, and outcome were not

associated with multiple viral infections.9e12 Interestingly,
a study published by Martin et al. revealed that illnesses
with multiple virus detections were correlated with disease
of less severity.13 Hence, whether multiple viral infections
correlate with disease severity remains unclear.
In comparison to traditional viral culture and polymerase
chain reaction detection for each viral pathogen, the
Luminex xTAG Respiratory Virus Panel (RVP) assay offers
simultaneous testing for several common respiratory viruses with improved diagnostic sensitivity along with comparable sensitivity to individual real-time nucleic acid
tests.14 The sensitivity and specificity of RVP were reported
to be 95.2% and 99.6%, respectively.15 Furthermore, RVP
can detect the presence of new viral pathogens which are
not routinely cultivated or tested in clinical laboratories,
such as human metapneumovirus (hMPV), human coronavirus (HCoV), and human bocavirus (HBoV).
In this study, we aim to analyze the clinical data of
hospitalized children who were febrile and had a RVP test
and compare the differences between patients with negative, single and multiple detections for viral pathogens. The
viral etiologies contributing to single or multiple infections
were compared as well as the data of patients with URTI
and LRTI.